# PhonologicalNetworks - Updated 29th March 2023

Data and code for the project 'Phonological Networks and Systematicity in Early Lexical Acquisition' (Laing, in prep).

This analysis draws on two corpora:

- Providence (US English); 5 infants (3 females) from Demuth et al, 2006
- Lyon (French); 4 infants (2 females) from Demuth & Tremblay, 2008

Demuth, Katherine, Jennifer Culbertson, & Jennifer Alter. 2006. Word-minimality, Epenthesis, and Coda Licensing in the Acquisition of English. *Language & Speech*, 49, 137-174.

Demuth, K. & A. Tremblay (2008). Prosodically-conditioned variability in children's production of French determiners. *Journal of Child Language*, 35, 99-127.

Infants' early words tend to be phonologically similar. This may reflect a systematic approach to early production, as they adapt newly-acquired forms to fit familiar structures in the output. This 'rich-get-richer' approach to phonological acquisition, known as *preferential attachment* in network science, proposes that new words cluster together with existing phonologically-similar words in the lexicon (or network). This contrasts with recent work (e.g. Fourtassi et al., 2020) showing that the learning environment is the key predictor in learning (*preferential acquisition*). This study expands on previous analyses of vocabulary norm data to analyse naturalistic data, namely phonetic transcriptions of nine infants' word productions, from word onset to age 2;6. Network growth models test whether 1) acquisition is best modelled through preferential attachment or preferential acquisition, 2) the trajectory of network growth changes over time, and 3) there are any differences in network growth of adult target forms vs. infants' actual productions. Results show that preferential attachment predicts acquisition of new words more convincingly than preferential acquisition: newly-acquired words are phonologically similar to existing words in the network. Furthermore, systematicity is most apparent in early acquisition, and infants produce their early words more systematically than we would expect from looking at target forms alone.

This script generates the code for the manuscript. Raw data files can be shared upon request. The files used in the script are as follows:

1. **globalthresholds_AOP**: this binds two subsets of data, one from each corpus.

This dataset shows the degree of each word in each child's global network, with a connectivity threshold of 0.25. 
The variables in this dataset are as follows:

- *threshold*: Threshold (scaled) of degree at which two words in the data count as connected, between 0.1-1. This data is filtered for E=0.25.
-*age*: Set at 30 to show the global network (all words produced by 30 months) for each child.
- *gloss1*: Target word in each child's data, matched to words on the respective language's CDI.
- *degree*: Number of other words (nodes) that each word in the network connects to.
- *threshold*: Set at 0.25 for this analysis; z score of phonological distance that establishes 2 words as being connected in the network.
- *AOP*: Age at which each word in the network was first produced.
- *degree_z*: Z score of *degree*.


2. **regression_data**: again, this binds together two sets of data, one for each corpus.

This dataset includes the PAT and PAQ growth values for use in the logistic regression models. The variables are as follows:

- *gloss1*: Target word in each child's data, matched to words on the respective language's CDI.
- *age*: Each month in the data is included for each child, in order to determine whether or not a word was produced in a given month.
- *PAT_val*: Raw PAT growth values, generated by establishing the mean degree of all the words that *gloss1* would connect to if it were acquired.
- *AOP*: Age at which each word in the network was first produced.
- *PAQ_target*: Raw PAQ growth values, generated based on target phonological forms by establishing the degree of *gloss1* in the target global network.
- *PAQ_actual*: Raw PAQ growth values, generated based on actual phonological forms by establishing the degree of *gloss1* in the actual global network.
- *learned_next*: Binomial variable to determine whether *gloss1* was acquired in the following month (*age*+1), 0 = not acquired, 1 = acquired.
- *Targetphon*: Word length (in phonemes) of the Target form.
- *vocab_agg*: total aggregated vocabulary size at *AOP*.
- *AOP_scaled*: *AOP* value scaled and centred.
- *length_scaled*: *Targetphon* value scaled and centred.
- *PAT_scaled*: *PAT_val* value scaled and centred.
- *PAQ_scaled_target*: *PAQ_target* value scaled and centred.
- *PAQ_scaled_actual*: *PAQ_actual* value scaled and centred.
- *total_freq*: frequency of *gloss1* in caregiver input in the given child's data.
- *freq_scaled*: *total_freq* value scaled and centred.
- *vocab_scaled*: *vocab_agg* value scaled and centred.
- *age_scaled*: *age* value scaled and centred.
- *category*: word category as defined by the CDI

In addition, the following variables occur across datasets:

- *Speaker*: Individual subject name from the corpus.
- *data_type*: Actual or Target data; derived from whether or not the data uses infants' actual phonological productions or the adult target form.
- *corpus*: English (Providence) or French (Lyon).
